Add "Mandatory" Dispatch Class (#26)
substrate-developer-hub/knowledgebase: current/runtime/fees.md

title: Transaction Fees
---

When transactions (extrinsics) are submitted to a blockchain, they are executed (dispatched) by the
nodes in the network. To be economically sustainable, nodes charge a fee to dispatch a transaction.
This fee must be covered by the sender of the transaction. The cost to dispatch transactions can
vary, so Substrate provides a flexible mechanism called "weights" to characterize the minimum cost to

> include a transaction in a block.

Reviewer: This paragraph is a bit off.
- "transactions" and "extrinsics" are not interchangeable. Transactions are one class of extrinsic.
- "execute" and "dispatch" are also not interchangeable. "Dispatch" means to invoke, while execute means to actually carry out the requested function call.
- "The cost to dispatch transactions can vary, so Substrate provides a flexible mechanism called "weights" to characterize the minimum cost to include a transaction in a block." You've put the cart before the horse in two ways here.
    - "The cost to dispatch transactions can vary" is not true as an antecedent. "The time to _execute_ transactions can vary" is an antecedent, and its consequent is that we charge variable transaction fees. 
    - ""weights" to characterize the minimum cost" is not true. Weight characterizes the time to execute a transaction and is used as one component in charging a fee to include it.

The fee system is heavily linked to the [weight system](/current/learn-substrate/weight.md). Make 
sure to understand weights before reading this document.

## Inclusion Fee

A transaction fee consists of three parts:

* `base_fee`: A fixed fee that is applied to every transaction. See
  [`TransactionBaseFee`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/pallet_transaction_payment/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.TransactionBaseFee).
* `length_fee`: A per-byte fee that is multiplied by the number of bytes in the encoded transaction. See
  [`TransactionByteFee`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/pallet_transaction_payment/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.TransactionByteFee).

> * `weight_fee`: A per-weight-unit fee that is multiplied by the weight of the transaction. The

Reviewer: You've corrected your own mistake here. A per-weight fee is not multiplied by the weight of the transaction (although that may be the default implementation). As you said, the runtime must implement a `Convert<Weight, Balance>` function, but it does not have to be a simple multiplier.

EDIT: I see this mistake existed before. Sorry :). But still worth fixing.

  weight of each dispatch is denoted via the flexible `#[weight]` annotation. The weight must be
  converted to the `Currency` type. For this, each runtime must define a
  [`WeightToFee`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/pallet_transaction_payment/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.WeightToFee)
  type that makes the conversion. `WeightToFee` must be a struct that implements [`Convert<Weight,
  Balance>`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/sp_runtime/traits/trait.Convert.html).

The sum of the three transaction fee components (i.e. `base_fee + length_fee + weight_fee`) is known

> as the _inclusion fee_. Even if a transaction fails, the signer must pay the inclusion fee.

Reviewer: Sort of, this can be more precise.

1. The fee is deducted _pre-dispatch,_ so there really is no concept of "succeeded" or "failed". This fee is gone before transaction execution even begins.
2. The Transaction Payment pallet requires that the account stay alive, i.e. not drop below the existential deposit due to the transaction fee. In that case, it would _try_ to pay the fee but fail and never even start execution.

## Default Weight Fees

The default fee system uses _fixed_ weights, which means that the arguments to a dispatch do not
affect its weight. The tiers in this system are represented by the following enum:

```rust
pub enum SimpleDispatchInfo {
    FixedNormal(Weight),
    MaxNormal,
    InsecureFreeNormal,
    FixedOperational(Weight),
    MaxOperational,
    FixedMandatory(Weight),
}
```

In order to delineate their purposes, the enums in this group are separated into _dispatch classes_,
which are also defined by an enum:

```rust
pub enum DispatchClass {
    Normal,
    Operational,
    Mandatory,
}
```

### Normal Dispatches

Dispatches in this class represent normal user-triggered transactions. These types of dispatches may
only consume a portion of a block's total weight limit; this portion can be found by examining the
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/frame_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).

> Normal dispatches are assigned a priority that is proportional to their weight.

Reviewer: This might be true but probably belongs in the tx queue document, which should handle priority of all extrinsics. You could say that normal dispatches go into the tx queue and given priority based on the queue's logic.

#### `FixedNormal`

Describes a normal function that will always have the specified weight.

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedNormal(10)]
pub fn some_normal_function_heavy() { some_computation(); }
```

#### `MaxNormal`

This is equivalent to `SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedNormal(Weight::max_value())`.

#### `InsecureFreeNormal`

> This means that the function has no weight; it will not contribute to block fullness at all and no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the function has no weight; it will not contribute to block fullness at all, and no
```

> weight-fee is applied. Although the `base_fee` and `length_fee` still need to be paid, as the name

Reviewer: ```suggestion
weight fee is applied. Although the `base_fee` and `length_fee` still need to be paid, as the name
```

> indicates a lack of weight fees also implies a lack of security, so dispatches of this type should
> be used with care.

Reviewer: I think the verb "used" here is a little vague. One reason to always try writing in the active voice.
```suggestion
indicates a lack of weight fees also implies a lack of security, so developers should use care
when adding dispatches of this type to their runtime.
```

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::InsecureFreeNormal]
pub fn some_normal_function_light() { noop(); }
```

### Operational Dispatches

Operational dispatches are those that go beyond user-triggered transactions; they are dispatches
that are necessary to provide network capabilities. These types of dispatches are not bound by the
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/frame_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio),
which means they may consume a block's entire weight limit. Dispatches in this class are given maximum

> priority and are exempt from paying the `base_fee` and `length_fee`.

Reviewer: I would be more specific than just "user-triggered". Is a fisherman a user? Sort of. Also, Substrate is generic, we may not have any regular-user-dispatchable `Operational`s in Polkadot, but someone developing their own runtime and/or pallet might have a valid reason to make some tx `Operational`.

The part about `AvailableBlockRatio` could be reworded. Without actually reading that rustdoc link, it sounds like these `Operationals` aren't bound by much of a limit at all.

#### `FixedOperational`

Describes a function that will have a fixed weight and can consume the reserved operational portion
as well.

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedOperational(20)]
pub fn mission_critical_function() { some_sudo_op(); }
```

#### `MaxOperational`

This is equivalent to `SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedOperational(Weight::max_value())`.

### Mandatory Dispatches

The most critical dispatches are classified as mandatory and represent dispatches that are part of
the block validation process; they must be inherent, meaning they may not be signed. Mandatory
dispatches will be included even if they cause a block to surpass the weight limit, so it is vital

> to ensure that they are validated separately. This can typically be accomplished by ensuring that

Reviewer: I think this is true but missing the mark a little bit. Since they are inherents, they are not gossiped on the network or included in the tx queue. Only the block author puts them into a block. They will need custom validation logic so that other validators in the network can accept of reject the block.

the operation can only be included once in a block and that it is always very light. In order to
make it more difficult for malicious validators to abuse these types of dispatches they may not be
included in blocks that return errors. This dispatch class exists to serve the assumption that it is
better to allow an overweight block to be created than to not allow any block to be created at all.

#### `FixedMandatory`

This function will have a fixed weight and be allowed in a block even if it makes it overweight.

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedMandatory(20)]
pub fn block_validation_critical_function() { block_validation_op(); }
```

> **Note:** Be careful! Functions that do not specify a dispatch type will get the default value of
> `FixedNormal(10_000)`. This is due to how things work in `substrate-node` and the desired
> granularity of Substrate. Even if you want to use the `SimpleDispatchInfo`, it is very likely that

> > you would want it to have a different default.

Reviewer: 1. I am on a mission to remove all exclamation marks. Maybe I can leave one or two in the entire KB. 
2. The default weight value is now gone (very recent change). Can you rewrite to say that you must express a weight for every dispatchable function?

^may just mean removing the `>` section altogether or moving (2) into somewhere logical.

## Fee Calculation

The final fee of a dispatch is calculated using the inclusion fee and a number of configurable

> parameters.

Reviewer: The final fee is the inclusion fee plus the (optional) tip. The inclusion fee varies _based on_ configurable parameters.

title: Transaction Fees
---

> When transactions or other extrinsics are submitted to a blockchain, they are dispatched (invoked)
> by the nodes in the network. To be economically sustainable, nodes charge a fee to dispatch an
> extrinsic. This fee must be covered by the sender of the extrinsic. Since the resources needed to
> execute an extrinsic can vary, Substrate provides a flexible mechanism called "weights" to
> characterize the _time_ it takes to execute an extrinsic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When a block author constructs a block, it must limit the block's execution time. A block body
consists of a series of [extrinsics](/current/learn-substrate/extrinsics.md). Since the resources
needed to execute an extrinsic can vary, Substrate provides a flexible mechanism called "weights"
to characterize the _time_ it takes to execute an extrinsic. To be economically sustainable and to
limit spam, some transactions --- primarily those dispatched by users --- require a fee prior to
transaction execution.
```

Although an extrinsic's weight is only one component of the fee charged to its sender, it is
recommended to understand the [weight system](/current/learn-substrate/weight.md) before reading
this document.

## Fee Calculation

The final fee of a dispatch is calculated using the weight of the dispatchable function and a number
of configurable parameters.

### Inclusion Fee

> An extrinsic fee consists of three parts:

Reviewer: Actually here we can be more specific. Inherents don't have fees because they are not signed.
```suggestion
A transaction fee consists of three parts:
```

> * `base_fee`: A fixed fee that is applied to every extrinsic. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `base_fee`: A fixed fee that is applied to every transaction. See
```

  [`TransactionBaseFee`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/pallet_transaction_payment/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.TransactionBaseFee).

> * `length_fee`: A per-byte fee that is multiplied by the number of bytes in the encoded extrinsic. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `length_fee`: A per-byte fee that is multiplied by the length, in bytes, of the encoded
  transaction. See
```

  [`TransactionByteFee`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/pallet_transaction_payment/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.TransactionByteFee).

> * `weight_fee`: A per-weight-unit fee that is multiplied by the weight of the extrinsic. The
>   weight of each dispatch is denoted via the flexible `#[weight]` annotation. The weight must be
>   converted to the `Currency` type. For this, each runtime must define a

Reviewer: Just want to get rid of this "multiplied".
```suggestion
* `weight_fee`: A fee based on the weight of the extrinsic. The weight of each dispatch is denoted
  via the flexible `#[weight]` annotation. The weight must be converted to the `Currency` type. For
  this, each runtime must define a
```

  WeightToFee(weight)
```

This `fee` is known as the "inclusion fee". Note that the extrinsic sender is charged the inclusion
fee _prior_ to the actual invocation of the extrinsic, so its cost will still be incurred if execution

> fails. In the event that an account does not have a sufficient balance to pay the fee (i.e. existential
> deposit + extrinsic fee), the account will be unable to submit the extrinsic to the blockchain network.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
fails. In the event that an account does not have a sufficient balance to pay the fee and remain
alive (i.e. existential deposit + inclusion fee), no fee will be deducted and the transaction will
not begin execution. This latter case should be rare as the transaction queue and block construction
logic perform checks prior to adding an extrinsic to a block.
```

```rust
pub enum SimpleDispatchInfo {
    FixedNormal(Weight),
    MaxNormal,
    InsecureFreeNormal,
    FixedOperational(Weight),
    MaxOperational,
    FixedMandatory(Weight),
}
```

In order to delineate their purposes, the enums in this group are separated into _dispatch classes_,
which are also defined by an enum:

```rust
pub enum DispatchClass {
    Normal,
    Operational,
    Mandatory,
}
```

### Normal Dispatches

Dispatches in this class represent normal user-triggered transactions. These types of dispatches may
only consume a portion of a block's total weight limit; this portion can be found by examining the
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/frame_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).
Normal dispatches are sent to the [transaction pool](/current/learn-substrate/tx-pool).

#### `FixedNormal`

Describes a normal function that will always have the specified weight.

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedNormal(10)]
pub fn some_normal_function_heavy() { some_computation(); }
```

#### `MaxNormal`

This is equivalent to `SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedNormal(Weight::max_value())`.

#### `InsecureFreeNormal`

> This means that the function has no weight; it will not contribute to block fullness at all, and no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This means that the function has no weight; it will not contribute to the block's weight, and no
```

are those that _provide_ network capabilities. These types of dispatches may consume the entire weight
limit of a block, which is to say that they are not bound by the
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/frame_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).
Dispatches in this class are given maximum priority and are exempt from paying the `base_fee` and
`length_fee`.

#### `FixedOperational`

Describes a function that will have a fixed weight and can consume the reserved operational portion
as well.

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedOperational(20)]
pub fn mission_critical_function() { some_sudo_op(); }
```

#### `MaxOperational`

This is equivalent to `SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedOperational(Weight::max_value())`.

### Mandatory Dispatches

Mandatory dispatches will be included in a block even if they cause the block to surpass its weight
limit. This dispatch class may only be applied to
[inherents](/current/learn-substrate/extrinsics#Inherents) and is intended to represent functions
that are part of the block validation process. Since these kinds of dispatches are always included

> in a block regardless of their weight, it is critical that their validation process prevents malicious

Reviewer: Slippery pronouns. The inherent's weight or the block's weight? Ditto on validation process.

Author: Can you please double-check that I hit the mark here?

validators from using them to craft blocks that are valid but impossibly heavy. This can typically
be accomplished by ensuring that the operation is always very light and can only be included in a
block once. In order to make it more difficult for malicious validators to abuse these types of
dispatches, they may not be included in blocks that return errors. This dispatch class exists to
serve the assumption that it is better to allow an overweight block to be created than to not allow
any block to be created at all.

#### `FixedMandatory`

> This function will have a fixed weight and be allowed in a block even if it makes it overweight.

Reviewer: Again
```suggestion
This function will have a fixed weight and be allowed in a block even if the function makes the block overweight.
```

inclusion fee.

## Default Weight Fees

All dispatchable functions in Substrate must specify a weight. Substrate provides flexible mechanisms
for defining custom weight logic as well as a default weight system that uses _fixed_ weights, which
means that the arguments to a dispatch do not affect its weight. The tiers in the default system are
represented by the following enum:

```rust
pub enum SimpleDispatchInfo {
    FixedNormal(Weight),
    MaxNormal,
    InsecureFreeNormal,
    FixedOperational(Weight),
    MaxOperational,
    FixedMandatory(Weight),
}
```

In order to delineate their purposes, the enums in this group are separated into _dispatch classes_,
which are also defined by an enum:

```rust
pub enum DispatchClass {
    Normal,
    Operational,
    Mandatory,
}
```

### Normal Dispatches

Dispatches in this class represent normal user-triggered transactions. These types of dispatches may
only consume a portion of a block's total weight limit; this portion can be found by examining the
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/frame_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).

> Normal dispatches are sent to the [transaction pool](/current/learn-substrate/tx-pool).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Normal dispatches are sent to the [transaction pool](/current/learn-substrate/tx-pool.md).
```

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::InsecureFreeNormal]
pub fn some_normal_function_light() { noop(); }
```

### Operational Dispatches

As opposed to normal dispatches, which represent _usage_ of network capabilities, operational dispatches
are those that _provide_ network capabilities. These types of dispatches may consume the entire weight
limit of a block, which is to say that they are not bound by the
[`AvailableBlockRatio`](https://substrate.dev/rustdocs/master/frame_system/trait.Trait.html#associatedtype.AvailableBlockRatio).
Dispatches in this class are given maximum priority and are exempt from paying the `base_fee` and
`length_fee`.

#### `FixedOperational`

Describes a function that will have a fixed weight and can consume the reserved operational portion
as well.

```rust
#[weight = SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedOperational(20)]
pub fn mission_critical_function() { some_sudo_op(); }
```

#### `MaxOperational`

This is equivalent to `SimpleDispatchInfo::FixedOperational(Weight::max_value())`.

### Mandatory Dispatches

Mandatory dispatches will be included in a block even if they cause the block to surpass its weight
limit. This dispatch class may only be applied to

> [inherents](/current/learn-substrate/extrinsics#Inherents) and is intended to represent functions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[inherents](/current/learn-substrate/extrinsics.md#Inherents) and is intended to represent functions
```
